**1.39 Translation**
1. O blindness, not long ago I venerated images just made from furnaces, gods made on anvils and with hammers, the bones of elephants, paintings, ribbons on ancient trees; whenever I had looked at a slippery stone, wet with olive oil, as if a power were present inside it, I used to worship it, I used to speak to it and I used to request favors from the unfeeling trunk, and those gods themselves, whom I had persuaded myself were real, I used to affix with serious slanders, when I believed that they were sticks, stones, and bones or resided in those materials.
2. Now, led by such a *teacher* into the ways of truth, I know all *these* things which are, I feel worthy feelings about worthy things, I make no complaint to the divine name, and what and to whom something is owed each person or head, I offer it, with unconfused gradations and distinctions.
3. So therefore should Christ not be held as a god by us and not otherwise maintained with worship of his godliness, for each who is able, from whom this long time we both receive such wonderful gifts, living, and we await the day when he will come?

**Jerome's References Translation**
1. Arnobius, a rhetorician, is held in high esteem in Africa, who, while he taught young men in Sicca to make speeches, and as yet was a pagan was compelled to *credulitas* in dreams, and was not granted, by a bishop, the faith which always he had fought against, he composed at night against his former religion most excellent books and together, as if with certain pledges, he entered the faith which he had sought.
2. Arnobius, under Emperor Diocletian, most prosperously taught rhetoric at Sicca in Africa, and wrote books against the pagans, which generally circulate... Firmianus and Lactantius were students of Arnobius... here in extreme old age he was the teacher of Caesar Crispus, son of Constantine, in Gaul...
3. Arnobius is uneven and excessive and, were it not for the distribution of his work, obscure.
4. I decide now and then to read Origen, thus because of his instruction, just as Tertullian and Novatus, Arnobius and Apollinarius, and some Church writers, the Greeks and the Latin-speakers equally, so that we may choose the good things of theirs, and avoid certain things, as the apostle Paul says: examine all things, and accept those which are good.
5. Arnobius distributed seven books against the pagans and his disciple Lactantius did the same.

**Persecutions (2.76-78) Translation**
76.1. "Why therefore," he says, "if you all serve the omnipotent God, and believe that he finds concern in your health and wellbeing, why does he allow you all to suffer such persecutions and endure all sorts of punishments and supplications?"
76.2 Let us, conversely, search everywhere, and ask why you, although you worship so many innumerable gods and although you build sacred temples to them, you mold statues of them from gold, you sacrifice flocks of animals, you throw all incense boxes of frankincense on full altars, why do you all not receive exemptions from so many crises and storms, from which daily you all live in many and deadly examples of your fortune?
76.3 Why, I say, do your gods cease to avert so many kinds of diseases and illnesses from you, shipwrecks, downfalls, fires, pestilences, sterility, loss of pledges and confiscation of goods, instances of discord, wars, rivalries, the capturing of cities and enslavements with your status and rights taken away?
76.4 But also God does not aid us in misfortunes of this sort. The reason is visible and clear. For nothing is promised to us in regard to this life, nor is any aid pledged or granted to us for those on earth of health in this sack of flesh; indeed we have been taught to think and to deem all threats of fortune, whatever they are, of little import, and if at any time some more grave force will have threatened us, and this must come to an end, to find pleasure in the misfortune and neither to fear nor flee, because more easily we are able to remove the bondages of the body from its chains and to destroy the shadowy blindness.

77.1 And so that which you say is the roughness of persecution is our freedom, not persecution, nor will upheaval inflict punishment, but will lead us to the light of freedom.
77.2 It is as if some brutish and dull man should reckon a man, put in prison, without a departure, never to afflict himself with heavy and burdensome punishments of investigations, unless he attacks the prison itself, he smashes the wood and burns the roof and the wall, he strips, hurls, and destroys the doors and other parts of the place, not knowing, with this done, for him to whom it seemed that he impeded light, it was being given by him, and sinful blindness was being taken away by him: likewise also you all do not take away life from us through flames, exiles, tortures, or wild beasts, with which you rend and drag our bodies, you exonerate us from our skins and bodies, ignorant, and by how much you threaten and proceed tp attack these likeness and our appearances, by this much you free us from our narrow and grievous chains, and you cause us to fly up to the light with all obligations removed.

78.1 Hence, men, refrain from empty questions to block your hopes, and if you do not think anything otherwise than this, you ought to believe yourself rather than the opinions of the revered thing.
78.2 The times, full of dangers, bear down, and deadly forces threaten: let us flee to the health-giving God, and not drive out the reason behind the offered gift. Whenever it is discussed concerning the safety of our spirits and the regard for ourselves, anything also should be done without rationale, as Arrianus approves that which Epictetus had said.
78.3 We hesitate, we dispute and we mistrust that which is said against the fullness of our faith: let us commit ourselves to God, and let not our incredulity show forth among us more than the magnitude of his name and power, lest, while we seek arguments against us, through which the truth seems false, that which we refuse and try, the final day approaches unobserved and we find ourselves in the throat of hostile Death.

**4.36 Censorship Translation**
36.1 And this is not fault enough. Also the personages of the gods are interpolated into farces and farcical plays, and laughter and hilarity is possible to be aroused for the empty spectators, the gods are struck by these jeering jokes: they shout and surge to the theaters, all the audience members make noise with clangs and claps, and, because it is able to be atoned for with no amount of sacrifice, gifts and presents are prepared for the prostitutes and scoffers of the gods, leisure from the public duties, immunity and vacation with crowns.
36.2 And do you dare, after this, to wonder from where these evil things rise, through which mortality is pressed without any intermission, when each thing  the wrapped disgraces
36.3 Because, if some indignation held you for your religious beliefs, you ought rather to have burned these letters, once these books, to have demolished those books, to have destroyed rather these theaters, in which the infamies of divinities are put forth in shameful stories.
36.4 For our scriptures indeed, why do they merit being given to the fires, why do our churches merit to be wildly razed? And in them the highest God is worshipped, peace and pardon are asked for all the magistrates, the armies, the kings, familiar friends, enemies, as yet for those enduring life and for those loosening from the chains of their bodies; in which nothing else is heard unless it is that which makes men, unless that which is gentle, pleasing, pure, chaste, communicators of a friendly affair, and with all whom it strengthens, joined, with the bond of brotherhood.

**4- The Accusation**
1.1 Because I have learned that some, who believe that they know as much as possible through their own intelligence, act crazily, run wild, and speak as if a manifestation of an oracle, say that after the Christians began on this earth, the world fell to ruin, the race of humans was afflicted with manifold evils, and even the gods themselves, dropped their sacred duties by which they were formerly accustomed to watch over our earthly matters, were banished from their regions of the earth.
1.2 I have decided, in accordance with my capacity and moderate ability of speech, to oppose these false accusations of hate and to do away with these complaints, so that either those people do not seem to themselves to have said something great, while they merely utter popular rumors, or if we keep ourselves from such quarrels, they think that their cause has prevailed, having beaten a faulty view, not having been rendered void by the silence of the protectors.
1.3 For I would not refuse that that accusation is most valid, and that we are deserving of the anger afforded us, if in our view, it were proven that we are the reason the world strayed from its laws, the gods were banished to faraway lands, and such tests of human sorrows were brought on this age.
**5- Nīl sub sōle novum**
2.1 Let us therefore inspect the reason behind that opinion, and what is said, and with removal of all desires of fighting, with which the consideration of these matters is accustomed to be obscured and covered up, let us examine what is said is true, with an examination of equal consideration.
2.2 For it will certainly be brought about by the connection of reasonable, logical arguments, that we are not impious, but rather they themselves are plaintiffs discovered worthy of that charge, who consider themselves to be worshippers of the gods and dedicated to the ancient ways.
2.3 And first, we ask with this friendly and calm speech: after the name of Christian began to be in these lands, what unusual was felt, what unseen was endured, what against the directly instituted laws, which is said to be and called nature, occurred?
2.4 Is it possible that those first elements were changed into adverse particles, from which it is said that all matter is composed?
2.5 Is it possible that the construction of this machine and mass of rocks, in which we are all protected and held enclosed, was in some part loosened or dissolved? Is it possible that this rotation of the earth, the original rudder of motion, is dying, and has begun either to crawl more slowly or to be dragged by precipitous whirling?
2.6 Is it possible that tendency of the signs has begun to raise the stars from their westerly parts and to be carried into the east? Is it possible that the sun itself, the leader of the stars, with whose light all things are draped and with whose warmth all things come to life, flared up, became warm, and spoiled its customary system into adverse conditions? Is it possible that the moon ceased to renew itself and to display its old shapes with the rebuilding of new ones?
2.7 Is it possible that the cold, that the warmth, that the tepid, have perished because of the disorder of uneven times? Is it possible that winter began to have long days and night began to call back the latest lights of summer?
2.8 Is it possible that the winds exhaled their final breaths, and after their gales died out, the sky was not packed into the clouds and the dry lands did not become moist with rainfall? Does the earth refuse to accept the seeds it is given or do trees not wish to bloom? Has the taste in edible crops and wines been changed? Is black blood pressed from olives and is light no longer shining, having been extinguished?
2.9 Do the animals, accustomed to the lands, and those living life in the seas not mate, not take in the children from their wombs, not protect them with their behavior and law?
2.10 Finally do men themselves, whom the first and original birth scattered through two habitable coasts of land, not marry with those solemn rites? Do they not produce most sweet swathes of children?
2.11 Do they not conduct public businesses, do they not conduct private and family affairs? Do they not, as it is pleasing to each man, direct their talents and skills through diverse arts and disciplines, and find enjoyment in their eagerness and activity?
2.12 Do they not rule, do they not command, those to whom the lot of such things was given? Do they not become richer daily in honors and powers, rule in debates of the laws, and interpret the laws and rights?
2.13 All other things in which human life is summed up and contained, do they not practice all these things in the tribes of men, following the institutions of their customs?
3.1 Therefore, since these things are so, and not any new thing has broken this succession of events, which separated the everlasting course of affairs, why is it said that a calamity befell the earth after the Christian religion showed itself in the world and uncovered the sacraments of the once concealed truth?
3.2 They say, "But the pestilence, and droughts, wars, scarcity of crops, locusts, mice, and hailstorms and other noxious things, with which human affairs are cursed, the gods bring upon us, irritated at your injustices and offenses"
3.3 If in transparent and requested affairs, that need no defense, it were not stupid to delay longer, I would certainly show, through unwinding former ages, that the evils which you speak of were not unknown, were not unexpected, and after our race earned to be given this title through the @happiness@ of this designation, that these disasters burst forth and had begun to disturb mortal affairs by a variety of crises.
3.4 For if we are the cause, and these plagues were contrived in accordance with our crime, from where did the people of antiquity coin these names of their suffering, from where did they give a name for wars? From what reasoning was antiquity able to designate a word for pestilences or hailstorms, or to create it among their voices, with which speech was set forth? For if these evils are new and come forth from recent offenses, who was able to come forth to form the words for these calamities, which he neither knew nor had learned that it was experienced or practiced by any of his ancestors at any time?
3.5 They say "scarcity of crops and grain tightly hold us."  For were the ancient times and the most archaic ages free from want at any time? Do not these names, with which these evils are assessed, testify and exclaim that no mortal was ever immune to these things?
3.6 And if this affair were difficult to believe, we would be able to discuss by the testimonies of so many authors, how often and which nations experienced a horrid famine and ceased to exist through increasing devastation.
3.7 "Most frequent storms of hail occur and grind away all things."-for do we not see in the ancient letters, stated and composed, also that stony showers often pulverized whole regions?
3.8 "difficult rains make the crops die and create a barrenness in the lands." - for was antiquity immune to this evil, when also we know that massive rivers died with dried mud?
3.9 "diseases and contagions burn inside the race of humans." - run through the writings of the annals, written in a myriad of languages: you will learn that entire races were repeatedly laid waste and were left devoid of inhabitants.
3.10 "each kind of the crops is destroyed and eaten away by locusts and mice." - go through your histories and you will be taught how often a prior age was afflicted by those pest and came to the misery associated with poverty.
3.11 "states waver to the point of danger, caused to tremble by most destructive movements of the earth" - what, did prior times not see cities stolen by enormous rifts, with all of their people, or did they have fortunes secure from this sort of disaster?
5.3 When Helen was snatched by the gods, generals, and other instigators, and was an ominous and calamitous person for the coming times, was this attributed to the crime of our religion?
5.4 When that massive Xerxes allowed the sea onto the lands and crossed the seas, was this caused by wrath against our name?
5.5 When, from the territory of Macedonia, one adolescent appeared and subjugated the kingdoms and peoples of the East through captivity and servitude, did we do this and did we incite the reasons for it?
5.6 When the Romans recently, as if some flowing river, submerged and buried entire nations, did we, evidently, throw the divine beings into this madness?
5.7 But if there is no man who dares to ascribe the things which were done long ago to our times, how are we able to be the originators of the present miseries, when nothing new occurs, but all these things are old and heard of by ancient peoples?
6.1 Although, concerning those wars which you say were stirred up because of hatred of our religion, it is not difficult to confirm that after Christ was heard on this earth, not only did these wars not increase in number, but also they diminished because of the lessening of the greater part of frenzying passion.
6.2 For since a great host of men have learned from his teachings and laws, that evil should not be repaid with evil, that it is more commendable to endure injustice than to inflict it, better to pour out oneself than to pollute our hands and conscience with another's blood, and the thankless world receives this kindness from Christ, through whom the madness of savagery was softened and began to keep hostile hands from the blood of kindred life.

**6- The true source of these evils**
7.1 "But if," they say, "no human affairs (dat of reference?) are inconvenienced by you, from where do these bad things come, by which our miserable existence has long been beset and oppressed?"
:::
8.2 For what if the base matter, which is dispersed through the four elements of things, contains the causes of all these miseries, wrapped in its plans and rules?
8.3 What if the movements of the stars bring forth these evils in certain constellations, areas of the sky, times, and regional lines, and bring about for those subjected to them the necessity of various crises?
8.4 What if, at appointed times, changes in the state of affairs occur, and as in maritime swells, sometimes favorable tides raise you, but then the prosperous times recede, exchanged for evils?
8.5 What if the ground itself, which we trample under our feet, has this law, that it should breath out most harmful vapors, through which the air itself is corrupted, and both @enacts@ harm to the body and weakens human activities?
8.6 What if - that which is closest to the truth - whatever seems against us is not an evil to the world itself, and judging all things which are made in terms of our conveniences, we accuse the happenings of nature with unsound opinions?
:::
9.1 He says "The sky does not rain, and we struggle from some kind of lack of grain." - For why do you require that the elements serve your needs and, so that you are able to live more easily and conveniently, and the compliant seasons ought to give themselves to serve your convenience?
9.2 For what if, in this manner, a man most wanting to sail, laments for a while that there are no winds and the breaths of the sky have gone quiet? Surely in the same way it should not be said that the tranquility of the earth is pernicious, because it denies the wishes of the sailors?
9.3 What if someone, accustomed to tan in the sun, and to dry his body, with similar rationale complains that his serenity is taken away by the recurring clouds? Surely in the same way it should not be said that the clouds cover the sky in a hostile veil, because it is not permitted to indulge yourself, to leisurely tan himself in the rays and to create a reason for drinking?
9.4 All these events, which take place and occur on this mass of rock, are not for our comforts, but must be regarded as the laws and order of nature itself.
10.1 And if anything occurs which favors us or our affairs too little in terms of happy outcomes, it is not immediately considered an evil and to be regarded a destructive thing.
10.2 The world rains or it does not rain: it rains for itself or it does not rain and, what perhaps you do not know, either it heats the excessively wet ground with a drying heat or it tempers a long drought with showers of rain.
10.3 It creates pestilences, diseases, famines, and other destructive ills: how is it that you happen to know that it does not remove what is abundant, so as to set a limit, through its own dispensations, on overly indulgent choices?
11.1 Should you dare to say: this and that in this world is bad, of which neither the origin nor the cause you are able to explain or analyze and, because it perhaps impedes your enjoyment of beloved things and other pleasures, would you say that it is a harmful and harsh thing?
11.2 So what? Because the cold is adverse to your limbs and is accustomed to freeze and constrict the movement and heat of your blood, therefore there should not be winter on this earth? And because you are not able to endure and to deal with the hot sun, should we take summer off the calendar and nature again arranged by another route with other laws?
11.3 Helleborre is a poison to men: should it therefore not grow? The wolf plots against sheepfolds: is it then nature at fault, because it created a beast most dangerous to the shepherds? The serpent destroys life with its bite: should you speak ill of the origin of things, because it added such savage wonders to all begotten life(?)
*12.1* This endeavor is exceedingly arrogant, because you yourself are not yours, but rather you are in another's possession, to wish to give a condition to more powerful ones, so that what you desire might occur, not that what you have found in these matters is fixed by its ancient structures.
12.2 Therefore if you all wish your complaints to have a place, men, before this is so you should teach us from where or who you are, if the world was brought forth and forged for you, or if you came into it as tenants from another place? (what type of ut clause?)
*12.3* So, since you are not able to say it is yours, and you are not able to explain for whose sake you live under this curvature of the heavens, cease to think that anything concerns you, since these things which occur do not occur (in a distributed manner? equally?) but give back and are rendered for the sum of the whole world.

**7- @The occurrence of the opposite@ must be explained**
13.1 They say "the gods carry out all bad things because of the Christians, and the death of crops is carried out by the deities." - I ask, when you say these things, do you not see that you flagrantly misrepresent us in clear and obvious lies?
13.2 There have been almost 300 years, to some degree more or less (is aliquid an adv here?), since Christians began to be and to be known on earth: were wars constantly occurring during these years, or was barrenness continual, was no peace found in these lands, no time without ceasing where there was cheapness and abundance of things?
13.3 For this first must be proven by him who accuses us, that these calamities have been continuous and unyielding, that never have mortals caught their breath entirely, without any days of rest, as it is said, and they endured the appearances of multiple crises.
14.1 And yet we see that in these intervening years and times innumerable victories have been reported over conquered enemies, the boundaries of the empire have been expanded, and nations with previously unheard names controlled in our power; repeatedly there have been years of the greatest outcomes, and such abundance and cheapness of goods that all trade shuttered to a halt, stricken by the power of the low prices.
14.2 For how was it possible that things were done and the race of humans endured until this time, if the fertility of things did not furnish all things @which use demands for life@?
15.1 But there were some times of necessities - and again these were relieved by abundances; against our consent certain wars were conducted - set right afterwards by victories and successes.
15.2 Why should we say that the gods are just now mindful of our injustices, only to be unmindful again?
*15.3* If, at a time when there is a famine, they are said to be angered, it follows that in a time of abundance they are not angered or intractable; and so the matter is brought down to this, that with playful changes they both put aside and take up their anger, and always restore themselves to the wholesome opinion, now with pardon and even recollection of offenses.

**8- Anger is not compatible with divinity**
17.1 And nevertheless, oh great worshippers and mouthpieces of the gods, why do you declare that those most revered gods feel resentment toward the Christian peoples? Therefore do you not draw your attention to it, do you not see it, how disgraceful, how indecent the emotional follies you attribute to the gods really are?
*17.2* For what else is rage than anger, than fury, than to be carried by a desire of vengeance, and made savage in the clutches of grief of one another, to rave in the numbness of ones chest?
17.3 The great gods know, endure, and feel this, what feral beasts, what wild animals, what deadly water-snakes contain in their poisoned teeth.
*17.4* It is proclaimed by you that you know what shallowness there is in men, what is culpable in earthly life, prevailing in that nature and residing in the strength of constant courage -
17.5 And what therefore inevitably follows, except that flaming sparks burst forth from their eyes, their gasping chest wavers, froth is spills from their mouth and their lips become pale from their burning words?
18.1 But if that is true, and explored and known, that the gods seethe with wrath and emotion of this sort, that they are disturbed by such a feeling, they are not immortal and everlasting and should not be placed, in any estimation, worthy of the status of a divinity.
18.2 For where there is any as it seems to wise men, emotion, there passion must be; where passion is allowed, there emotional commotion is sure to follow; where there is this commotion, there grief and weakness; where there is grief and weakness, there is a place for diminishment and corruption - which two, if they harass, there ruin is close by, a death ending all things and stealing life from all sentient beings.
19.1 Why? Because you present them in this way, that they are not only fickle and hot blooded, but also - that which is agreed to be far removed from the gods - both unfair and unjust, and have absolutely no mind for fairness or restraint?
*19.2* For what is so unjust as to resent some and wound others, to lament about men and destroy harmless crops, to disdain the name of the Christians and to undermine its worshippers with every expense?

**9- The shared suffering of the @pagan@ must be explained**
21.1 Let them bestow upon you favorable health, and bestow adverse and even the worst health upon us. Let them irrigate your fields with favorable rains, and whatever splashes of rain there are, let them steal them from our small fields. Let them arrange your sheep to be multiplied with many offspring, let them bring unlucky sterility on our herds.
21.2 Let them produce full harvest at the farm from your olives and vineyards, but let them prohibit that one drip be pressed from our vines.
21.3 And for the last and final punishment, let them order that crops retain their flavor in your mouth, but in ours that honey be made bitter, that the rivers of olive oil be spoiled, and that the faithless wine suddenly be turned @bitter in the lips of drinker@
*22.1* Since these things themselves testify that they do not occur at all, and it is agreed that life giving gifts do not overflow less for us whatsoever and do not overflow more for you, the desire, which is great, to contend that the gods are hostile and unfriendly to the Christians, whom in most sad and in happy circumstances, you see no difference from you in any reckoning?
22.2 If you allow the truth (verum acting as a noun for once?) to be spoken without any toadyism, these are words, just words; indeed things believed through pretenses, not proven by the finding of some inquiry.

**10- The truth of the matter**
23.1 But yet the true gods, and those who are worthy to have, who are worthy to bear the weight of this name, neither rage nor scorn nor construct insidious plots because it does harm to another.
23.2 And indeed it is actually irreverent and transcending all sacrileges to believe that the wise and most blessed nature thinks it something great, if anyone submits himself to it in lowly flattery, and if this were not done, to believe itself insignificant, and to have fallen from the tip of the highest summit.
*23.3* It is childish, insignificant, and pitiful, scarcely fitting for those whom for a long time the testing of teachers named them daemones and heroes, not to have known heavenly matters and, to live in this muddier composition of things with the fate of this contract.
24.1 These are you opinions, these are your words, impiously thought up and more blasphemously believed.
24.2 Indeed, to speak out more truthfully, the soothsayers, the diviners, the prophets, the seers, and vain fanatics concocted these stories, who, so that their arts might not die and so that they might not drive off the meager offerings for their infrequent consultations, whenever they find that you wish the matter to come under fire,
*24.3* they shout "The gods are disregarded, and it is highly rare now for you to be in temples, the ancient ceremonies lie in ruins, laughed at, and the most ancient ceremonies of religious rites certainly have declined from the superstitions of new religions, and rightly the race of humans is pressed by so many straits of miseries and tortured by the toils of their labors."
24.4 And men, the dull kind, and unable to see that situation which is under examination because of their engendered blindness, frenzied, dare to declare what you insane people are ashamed to believe.

**CHRISTIANITY’S NOVELTY IS NO DISPARAGEMENT (2.66–67, 71–75)**
**11- It is not true that old should always be preferred to new**
66.2 For that which you are accustomed to charge us with, that our religion is new and sprung about just a few days earlier, and we have ordered our followers to forsake the ancient and ancestral religion and have converted to foreign and strange practices, that is proffered with no rationale behind it. (is nulla f abl or N acc? no macron suggests the latter but makes more sense as abl with ratione)
66.3 For what is it, if in this way we wished to impose blame on those prior and ancient days, because, after crops were discovered, they despised nuts and rejected fruits, because they ceased to clothe themselves with bark and cover themselves in pelts, after woven garments were invented, which was more useful and advantageous in the way it was worn, or because after houses and their more luxurious successors were built, they no longer loved their huts and did not prefer to live under cliffs and in caves as beasts do?
66.4 It is common for all, and understood from one's earliest years, to prefer good things to bad, to put useful things in front of the useless, to pursue and seek that which is clearly more precious and dear, and to attach to it the hope of prosperity and prosperous living.
**12- The @pagans@ themselves abandoned old practices**
*67.1* And so, when you stress to us our distraction from the religion of our forefathers, it is agreed that you should look at the reason behind it, not the fact that it occurred, and not to oppose why we have abandoned it, but rather to contemplate why we are followers of something else. For if it is any fault or crime to change one's feeling, and to move from ancient laws to other new things and purposes, that charge would also reflect on you, who so many times changed your customs and way of life, who moved to other customs and religious rites with a condemnation of our ancestors.
*67.2* For do you have the people distributed into five classes, as your ancestors once did? Do you make magistrates by means of the people? (through the people's choice?) Do you know the military, urban, and common assemblies and elections there are? Do you watch over the sky and make actions idle at the announcements of bad omens? If you are preparing for war, do you show a signal from the citadel? Or do you follow the priestly laws? Do you ask for stolen things through demands for redress (technical term?)? Or, attending to a crisis, do you look to Mars, and exact a hope for successful battle from his acumen?
67.3 Do you observe the laws of age qualifications for public office for those entering an office? Do you observe the Cincian (?) laws in gifts and presents? Do you observe the censorial laws in limiting costs? Do you keep the hearth perpetually ablaze in the heavenly sanctuary? Do you make sacred meals by the placing of salt-cellars and through statues of the gods? When you get married, do you lay out couches with your toga and summon the geniuses of the married ones? Do you stroke the hair of brides with the caelibaris hasta? Do you carry the togas of the girls to the shrine to Virgin Fortune? Do your mothers labor in the atriums of their houses, proving their industriousness? Do they abstain from draughts of wine? And is there a duty for the neighbors and relatives to kiss those women, so that they can prove that they are sober and temperate?
**13- Everything has a beginning, including the gods**
69.1 But our name is young, and the religion which we follow was born just a few days ago. - however, that I might grant it, that which is presented against us is not a stretch or falsehood, for what is there in the goings on of humans, which either is made through the work of our bodies and hands or is preserved by the discipline and knowledge of our minds, which did not originate from some point and come forward into the use and experience of mortals? Medicine, philosophy, music, and all the remaining arts through which @general@ life is constructed and refined, were they born alongside humanity, and not more recently - @indeed only slightly before now@ - did they begin to be pursued, learned, and celebrated?
*69.2* Before the Tuscan Tages reached our shores of light, did any man know, or was he worried that he should know and learn, whether by the cracks of lightning and in the veins of entrails something was signified? (I messed this sentence up pretty badly until I looked at the translation. I think I understand it now but I needed help.) When did the movements of the stars or the art of horoscopy begin to be known? Was it not after the Egyptian Theutis or after Atlas, as certain men say, the carrier, steward, support and pillar of heaven?
70.1 But why do I concern myself with small issues? The immortal gods themselves, whose temples you presently visit, and whose divine powers you humbly worship, just as it is related in your writings and opinions, did they not begin to be or to know from a fixed time and to be named with established pronunciations of their names?
70.2 For if it is true that Jupiter, along with his brothers, was born from Saturn and his wife, before the marriage of Ops, Jupiter @was never born@ (should partus be the noun or participle form? The macron shows noun but I think participle might be correct), either the supreme Jupiter or the Stygian, nor the master of the ocean, nor Juno, indeed no one else, after removing from consideration the two creators, lived in the seats of heaven, but were conceived and born from their intercourse and drew the breath of life.
70.3 Therefore, the god Jupiter began to exist from a certain time, to merit worship and sacrifices from a certain time, and to be placed before his brothers in the seats of power.
:::
*70.5* And since it is this way, when you speak about the novelty of our religion, do our ideas not come into mind (what noun is implied by vestrae?) and do you not care to consider, when your gods sprung up, what origins they had, what reasons for existence they had, or what they came from and what roots they burst from? Moreover it is shameful, and moreover immodest, to do that which you see yourself doing, to reprimand another in that way, to put forth these things in place of slanders and accusations which are able to be turned back against you in turn?

**14- The difference in age is trivial considering the scale of infinite time**
71.1 But that which we do is new, moreover that which you do is ancient and excessively old - and why does that either aid your cause or damage ours? It is a new thing which we carry on, and at some point it will become an old thing: what you all do is old, but it began in a time in which it was new and unexpected. Moreover the authority of a religion should not be determined by its length of existence but by the power within it, and it does not make sense to examine on what day you began to worship but rather what it was you began to worship.
71.2 He says "300 years ago your religion had not yet come to be."
-and your gods are not older than two thousand years.
"through what rationale or computations is that able to be determined?"
-Not with difficult computations or obscure ones, but those which one who wishes is able to see and to feel, just as it is said, in his hands.
71.3 Who gave birth to Jupiter and his brothers? Saturn, married to Ops, as you say, born from Caelus and Hecate. Who bore Picus, father of Faunus and grandfather of Latinus? Saturn, as you likewise relate in your scriptures and authors.
71.4 Therefore, if these things are so, it follows that Picus and Jupiter are joined to each other by the right of brotherhood, namely they came from one blood and one seed.
"It is as you said."
-How many steps of descent are there from Jupiter and Picus up to Latinus?
"three, as the series shows."
-Would you say that Faunus, Latinus, and Picus lived for 120 years? For beyond that (should vita have a macron or not? Nom if in clause or abl with ultra) it is denied that the life of a man is able to be prolonged.
"This thought is proper and sensible."
-therefore there are a full 360 years after them?
"The matter is so, as your computation indicated."
-whose father-in-law was Latinus? "Aeneas"
-of whom was Aeneas the father? "Ascanius, founder of the town of Alba"
-how many years was the kingdom at Alba?
"nearly 420 years."
-The city of Rome is indicated to be of what age, according to the Annals?
"It shows 1,050 years, or not much less than that."
71.5 Therefore from Jupiter, who is the brother of Picus, who is the father of lesser and other gods, there have been almost 2,000 years to now - or fully that, if we give a generous guess for the length of time. And since it is not able (how to construe quod cum) to be refuted, not only is your religion, which you observe, shown to be recent and newborn, but it is shown that the gods themselves are infants and children at this point, to whom you furnish bulls and other sacrifices, with a danger of corruption, whom it is right as yet to be suckled with breasts and drops of milk.

**15- God has not recently come into existence, but only recently been recognized, just as has occurred with @pagan@ deities**
72.1 But your religion precedes ours by many years, and by this logic yours is more truthful because it was built on the authority of age. And why is it advantageous to be older by as many years as possible, when it began from a certain time, or of what length are 2000 years compared with so many thousands of different ages?
72.2 And nevertheless so that we might not seem to thrust our cause forward with such long pretense, unless it is tiresome, say, does the omnipotent and supreme god seem to be a new thing to you, and those reverent ones who worship him to pursue and lead an unheard, unknown, and hastily made religion?
72.3 Is there anything older than him, or is there anything able to be found which precedes him in time and name? Is he alone unborn, immortal and perpetual? Who is the head and source of all? Is it not him? To whom does eternity owe this itself, the fact that it is called eternity? Not to him? Does it not stem from his everlasting nature that the ages advance infinitely? That is indisputable and true.
72.4 Therefore what we follow is not new, but at a late hour we learned what is proper to follow and to worship or where it is agreed to affix hope of safety and to arrange wholesome aid. For not yet had he shone forth, who points the way to those wandering and emits the light of knowledge to those held in the deepest fog and shatters the blindness of ignorance.
73.1 But is a blame of this sort turned against us alone? (I think these next two should be one question, not two? Or I'm missing something) Did you all not bring back into the number of your gods, after the consuls Piso and Gabinius, the Egyptian divinities who are called Serapis and Isis? Did you not begin both to know and to sanctify in your remarkable religion the Phrygian mother, whose founder is shown to be either Midas or Dardanus, after Hannibal Poenus seized Italian territory and demanded supremacy of the world?
*73.2* Are the sacred rites of the mother Ceres, because they are unknown to you and adopted a little before now, maintained (is dicantur from dicere or dicare) that they are Greek, testifying its very newness in its name? Is it not contained in the writings of teachers that the Pompilian *indigitamenta* did not know the name of Apollo, from which it is apparent and obvious that this deity was unknown to you, however after at some point he began to exist and be known by you.
73.3 Therefore if anyone should ask you why you took up worship at such a late point of these divinities whom we have just mentioned, it is certain that you would respond: either because we did not know that they belonged in the number of the gods until recently, or because we have now been taught by oracles, or because we have been saved in the harshest circumstances through their favors and aid.
73.4 But if you will think this to be valid, also consider that there was a response using a similar rationale from our side. Our religion is now born: for now, having been sent, he came, who showed it to us, who brought us into the truth, who showed us what God is (why is it quid?), who called us to his worship away from imaginary things.

**16- The reason for the delayed arrival of Christianity is unknown, but is in accordance with God’s plan**
74.1 
